Hi Nicky. It's been
such a great journey.
I'm quite sad that
this is our last week.
Hi Prashan, I know what you mean,
but we're going to
finish on a high with
some really exciting content.
Zara's data is now
fully prepared.
How are we going to help her
finish off for reconciliation?
We're going to let Excel
do all the hard work
by employing the help of it's
logical and lookup functions.
Let's start with discussing
logical functions first.
Can you please give
us some examples
of the logical functions
we'll be looking
at and suggest why they might
help us with data analysis.
We're going to start
with the best-known
and arguably most useful
logical function,
which is the IF function.
We're then going to
move on to taking
a little look at its helpers,
the AND and OR functions.
As we'll see in the videos,
all these functions
are really useful
for performing data
transformation,
cleaning, and of course,
making determinations.
The IF function is
definitely one of
the more useful
functions in Excel
with a wide range
of applications,
but it can be a bit confusing for
people who haven't
used it before.
So could you please
talk us through
the structure of an IF function?
Good idea. So let's say
I have a price list,
but if the customer
is a gold partner,
I need to apply a five
percent discount.
I'm going to use an IF to
make this determination.
The first argument with an
IF is always a logical test.
This compares two values
using a logical operator.
So in my example,
I'm going to check if
customer type equals gold.
This will either
be true or false.
The second argument
in the IF is what to
do if the logical
test returns true.
In this case, I'll
subtract the five percent.
The third and final
argument is what
to do if the logical
test returns false.
In this case, really easy,
I just charge the usual price.
That's great for true
or false situations.
But what if I have
three outcomes?
Let's say silver partners get
a three percent discount.
Well, the solution here is
actually to use another, IF.
This is called Nesting IFs,
and we'll see it in the videos,
but basically it works like this.
The first IF checks, if
it's a gold partner.
If it is, easy they
get five percent.
If not, the second IF
is going to check if
they are silver partner,
if they are, they're going
to get three percent,
otherwise they're paid
the regular price.
Now, will we be looking at
other logical functions
like the IFERROR function?
Good catch. Unfortunately we
don't have time in the videos,
but IFERROR is a useful function,
so we've included it in
this week's toolbox,
and it is required for
the practice challenge
and the assessment.
So learners don't
forget to check it out.
Great. Let's talk about
LOOKUP functions.
Well, the first ones we'll
look at is the VLOOKUP.
These are widely
used in business for
connecting data sets
and for error checking.
But they are often criticized
for being inefficient.
Should we be looking at VLOOKUPs?
VLOOKUPs do have their drawbacks,
but Microsoft have actually
recently overhauled the VLOOKUP
and it's now super fast
even on large data sets.
VLOOKUP is comparatively easy to
learn and actually does
have its applications.
So given now that it's a
widely used in business,
I think it's important
for everyone to know it.
Now, we actually have
two videos on VLOOKUPs.
The first on categorizing
and the second on matching.
Can you please explain
the difference here?
Yes. In the first video,
we're going to look at what's
called a range lookup.
This is less well-known,
but a really good option that
allows us to categorize data.
So rather than doing
an exact match,
it looks to see what
range and number
falls within. This is ideal.
For example, if you were
trying to say grade papers,
you don't want to have to
provide a lookup table
detailing every possible grade
that students might get.
You just want to say if it falls
between 70 and 79, they get a B.
That's where you'd
use a range lookup.
The other video focuses on
the more commonly used
exact match VLOOKUP.
This is where you want to look up
a specific thing
like a Customer ID,
and return a corresponding
value like the Customer Name.
As you say, VLOOKUP is one of
those functions you have to know.
But it does have the
limitation that you can only
return the value to the
right of the lookup column.
So can you please
suggest an alternative?
I can. A brand new function
called XLOOKUP has recently been
introduced and it addresses
all the limitations
of the VLOOKUP.
It works vertically
and horizontally,
and it even allows a search
on wildcard characters.
So really exciting and we
will take a quick peek at it.
I think the XLOOKUP,
may eventually
replace the VLOOKUP,
but a lot of people don't have
it yet as it's only being
rolled out to Office 365
users at this stage.
So what other options are there?
Well, that's a question our
last video we'll answer.
We're going to look at
two very versatile
LOOKUP functions
called INDEX and MATCH.
They can be used independently,
but typically we nest the
MATCH inside the INDEX,
which gives us a very
flexible lookup.
With two matches, you get
a potent two-way lookup.
It's going to be a busy week.
Any last words of encouragement
for our learners?
Yeah, be patient with yourselves,
learning is a process and
practice, practice, practice.
Because practice makes permanent.
Thanks Nicky. So let's recap
the topics you'll be
covering this week.
Performing logical
operations with IF,
applying advanced
logical operations,
categorizing data with VLOOKUP,
matching data with
VLOOKUP and XLOOKUP,
and then advanced data
matching with INDEX and MATCH.
You've got another great
video for each topic
and some challenging quizzes
for you to test yourself.
Don't forget to check
out the toolbox as it
will help you with this
week's practice challenge.
You're now on your way to
becoming an Excel ninja.